doc: best practices within multi-tenancy solutions (#5353)
operator-framework/operator-sdk: website/content/en/docs/best-practices/multi-tenancy.md

tenants. Operators that deploy a `accept all traffic from anywhere in the cluster` style policy, are creating an obstacle in
pursuing this goal, especially if it cannot be disabled. In security-conscious environments policies like these are not allowed
in production. In such cases your operator should minimally **have the option to prevent [NetworkPolicy][k8s-network-policy] objects from being
created** and leave these to the user. In more advanced cases, your operator should create [NetworkPolicy][k8s-network-policy] configurations that
follow the least-privilege principle as well implement deny-all-allow-some rules.

### Resource Requests

Create resource requests for CPU and memory:

* for your Operator's manager `Deployment` (See `config/manager/manager.yaml`)
* for any `Pods` and `Deployments` which are creates by your Operator

```yml
  ...
  # TODO(user): Configure the resources accordingly based on the project requirements.
  # More info: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/manage-resources-containers/
  resources:

>     limits:
>       cpu: 500m
>       memory: 128Mi

Author: ```suggestion
```

    requests:
      cpu: 10m
      memory: 64Mi
    ... 
```

In order to prevent tenants from consuming all the resources on a cluster or blocking other workloads 
from being scheduled, many production clusters will define [ResourceQuota][k8s-resources-quotas] configuration.
[ResourceQuota][k8s-resources-quotas] configuration in a namespace will cause all pods without 
[Requests and limits][k8s-requests-limits] for CPU and memory to be rejected.

Because OLM-managed Operators do not run on Cluster infra nodes, they will consume paid CPU cores. 
Users will naturally want to limit the maximum amount of resources these non-workload components can take up. 

> For this reason, if you are integrating with [OLM][olm], you should, **always ship your operator `Deployment` with resource requests limits for CPU and memory**.

Reviewer: I don't think that enforcing CPU limit is a good practice. CPU is compressible and extra cycles (available on a node and not requested) are allocated proportionally to the requests made. As such operator pods would not "eat workload lunch" if the worload pods have set requests according to their appetite. But if there are free cycles why not let operators use them rather than getting them lost?
In regard to quotas, the cluster-admins have always the possibility to set defaults if they still want to enforce limits: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/manage-resources/cpu-default-namespace/

Author: This doc is about the set the requests not the limits. 
However, setting the limits are also a good practice. WHY?

> to a bad configuration change that causes a program to go out of control and use 100% of the available CPU 
Ref:https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/containers-kubernetes/kubernetes-best-practices-resource-requests-and-limits

Also, because of security reasons as well. See: https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Docker_Security_Cheat_Sheet.html#rule-7-limit-resources-memory-cpu-file-descriptors-processes-restarts

Set the limits for memory and CPU mainly will ensure that the pod will terminate and be re-deployed if something goes wrong and will avoid DoS/malicious attacks.

Author: Please, check that the doc is only speaking about the requests anyway.

Author: Hi @dmesser @fgiloux 

This doc is about the set the requests not the limits. 
However, by looking at that I understand that: 

If not set, bad configurations or code implementations can consume all available resources which could affect other components on the clusters. Also, for security reasons such as dos attacks which can take advantage of that. More info: https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Docker_Security_Cheat_Sheet.html#rule-7-limit-resources-memory-cp[…]le-descriptors-processes-restarts and https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/containers-kubernetes/kubernetes-best-practices-resource-requests-and-limits

- **For memory:** If exceeds its memory limit, it might be terminated and k8s will restart it.
- **For CPU:** Similar idea, however, it will not be killed for excessive CPU usage. According to the doc[2], the CPU is considered a “compressible” resource and the Operator starts hitting the CPU limits, Kubernetes starts throttling the container. This means the CPU will be artificially restricted, giving a potentially worse performance only. 

For the purpose of this PR, it is fixed and is only speaking about requests.

Author: that was changed to explain when happens and added as optional.

> For this reason, if you are integrating with [OLM][olm], you should, **always ship your operator `Deployment` with resource requests limits for CPU and memory**.

Author: ```suggestion
For this reason, if you are integrating with [OLM][olm], you should, **always ship your operator `Deployment` with resource requests ammounts for CPU and memory**.
```

in production. In such cases your operator should minimally **have the option to prevent [NetworkPolicy][k8s-network-policy] objects from being
created** and leave these to the user. In more advanced cases, your operator should create [NetworkPolicy][k8s-network-policy] configurations that
follow the least-privilege principle as well implement deny-all-allow-some rules.

### Managing Resources

#### Resource Requests

Create resource requests for CPU and memory:

* for your Operator's manager `Deployment` (See `config/manager/manager.yaml`)
* for any `Pods` and `Deployments` which are created by your Operator

```yml
  ...
  # TODO(user): Configure the resources accordingly based on the project requirements.
  # More info: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/manage-resources-containers/
  resources:
    requests:
      cpu: 10m
      memory: 64Mi
    ... 
```

In order to prevent tenants from consuming all the resources on a cluster or blocking other workloads 
from being scheduled, many production clusters will define [ResourceQuota][k8s-resources-quotas] configuration.
[ResourceQuota][k8s-resources-quotas] configuration in a namespace will cause all pods without 

> [Requests and limits][k8s-requests-limits] for `CPU` and `Memory` to be rejected.

Author: I supplemented the info. Note that how the CPU limits works are defined as well in this document.
Also, we are adding it as Optional in the general recommendations in order we try to reach a common sense.
Also, we highlight a lot here that usually cluster admins does configurations that will limit the max consumption for all pods in an ns which according to k8s docs is usually done for both (CPU and Memory). 

However, I'd prefer here stick with the `ideally` proposed by the original author of this guidelines, Daniel Messer, since it also matches with other sources : 
- https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/containers-kubernetes/kubernetes-best-practices-resource-requests-and-limits
- https://geekflare.com/kubernetes-best-practices/
- https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Docker_Security_Cheat_Sheet.html#rule-7-limit-resources-memory-cp[%E2%80%A6]le-descriptors-processes-restarts
- https://stackoverflow.com/questions/48907371/what-purpose-do-cpu-limits-have-in-kubernetes-resp-docker
- https://blog.kubecost.com/blog/requests-and-limits/

IMO the main reason to limit is not to allow 1 pod to consume all and in this way affects the others which also can happen for both CPU and memory. Also, see from k8s docs:
- If you specify a CPU limit but do not specify a CPU request: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/assign-cpu-resource/#if-you-do-not-specify-a-cpu-limit
- Motivation for CPU requests and limits: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/assign-cpu-resource/#motivation-for-cpu-requests-and-limits

**By configuring the CPU requests **and** limits of the Containers that run in your cluster, you can make efficient use of the CPU resources available on your cluster Nodes.** 

So, seems that the above references does **not** go along with your pov that would not be a good practice to limit CPU but is a good practice to limit the memory.

> [Requests and limits][k8s-requests-limits] for `CPU` and `Memory` to be rejected.

Author: I think we could sort it down. So, closing.

> Because OLM-managed Operators do not run on Cluster infra nodes, they will consume paid CPU cores. 

Author: Removed.

Users will naturally want to limit the maximum amount of resources these non-workload components can take up. 

> For this reason, if you are integrating with [OLM][olm], you should, **always ship your operator `Deployment` with resource requests amounts for CPU and memory**.

Reviewer: I would rephrase it: "Cluster administrators will naturally want to limit the amount of resources that can be taken away from their workload by other components". Rationale for  the rephrasing is that if the resources are not consumed by the workload there is no harm of them getting used by the operator rather than getting wasted.

I would also flesh that out as the relation may not be obvious to the readers if they don't know the details of the way resources are managed in Kubernetes. Proposal:
Resource request is what is used by Kubernetes for accounting resource availability and for the scheduler to select a node suitable for the pods.

Reviewer 2: But isn't the term "limits" in the rephrased sentence irritating if the user is in fact asked to set requests?

What about "Cluster administrators will naturally want to provide enough resource requests to their Operators in order to give them sufficient memory resources for safe operations, and avoid that other workloads impact them negatively".

After all requests are a way to give a "safe space" to the workload which is setting the request. As long as the workload stay in this requests bounds it will usually not get under pressure or even evicted. This is specifically relevant in resource constraint envs like SNO.

Author: adressed.

The [ResourceQuota][k8s-resources-quotas] configuration also is applied to tenant workloads that are managed by your operator. Cluster administrators will typically set

> a [ResourceQuota][k8s-resources-quotas] for each tenant's namespace/project as part of the onBoarding. If your operator creates `Pods/Deployments` inside

Reviewer: I would remove project as it is an OpenShift only thing

> the tenant namespace which do not specify at least resource requests for `CPU` and `Memory`, those `Pods/Deployments` will fail to schedule and tenants

Reviewer: **will fail** not if the cluster admin have created a limitRange with defaults. I would use **may fail** and **tenants may not be able**

Author: done

from being scheduled, many production clusters will define [ResourceQuota][k8s-resources-quotas] configuration.
[ResourceQuota][k8s-resources-quotas] configuration in a namespace will cause all pods without 
[Requests and limits][k8s-requests-limits] for `CPU` and `Memory` to be rejected.

Because OLM-managed Operators do not run on Cluster infra nodes, they will consume paid CPU cores. 
Users will naturally want to limit the maximum amount of resources these non-workload components can take up. 
For this reason, if you are integrating with [OLM][olm], you should, **always ship your operator `Deployment` with resource requests amounts for CPU and memory**.

The [ResourceQuota][k8s-resources-quotas] configuration also is applied to tenant workloads that are managed by your operator. Cluster administrators will typically set
a [ResourceQuota][k8s-resources-quotas] for each tenant's namespace/project as part of the onBoarding. If your operator creates `Pods/Deployments` inside
the tenant namespace which do not specify at least resource requests for `CPU` and `Memory`, those `Pods/Deployments` will fail to schedule and tenants

> will not be able to use your operator. Therefore, your operator should **always apply at least resource requests for CPU and

Reviewer: I would also mention the scheduling aspect. Proposal:
Therefore and for ensuring a suitable scheduling your operator...

> memory** for `Pods/Deployments` that it creates as part of reconciliation. Ideally your operator also applies resource 

Reviewer: nitpicking: "as part of the reconciliation logic"

> limits to those `Pods/Deployments`. 

Reviewer: Disagree on "ideally" I don't think it is "ideal" to apply CPU limits. I would rephrase:Your operator may also apply memory limits to those"Pods/Deployments"

Author: imo I think we ought to stick here with the original propose: https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-sdk/pull/5353#discussion_r753102148

#### General guidelines

**Note that pretty much all controllers consume:**
- `CPU`: largely based on the number of reconciliations they perform, which are generally related to event activity for resources they're watching.

> - `Memory`: largely based on the number of primary resources that exist (multiplied by some factor based on the number of operand resources they need to watch as a result) via informer caches.

Reviewer: I would rephrase it. I think that one of the pitfalls that many operators are failing into is that they watch resources with high cardinality like secrets possibly in all namespaces. Besides the security aspect, which may be worth mentioning somewhere this has a massive impact on the memory used by the controller on big clusters. Such resources should either be filtered by label or possibly avoided by for instance using a custom resource instead.

Reviewer: Also it may be worth mentioning ResyncPeriod. Setting it to low would also cause the unnecessary consumption of CPU cycles

Author: The points are valid, however, they do not fit in the scope context of this doc. 
IHMO would be nice we have a doc about good practices that describe them and how to avoid a huge unnecessarily consumption of the resources. Please, feel to work on that., I think would be a great follow up.

Reviewer: Ack. I created: https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-sdk/issues/5382

Author: Cool closing that as sorted out

Operator authors cannot anticipate how they scale in usage in all customer environments, so setting one-size-fits-all 

> that fits well for all scenarios is not possible then, clusters administrators must be allowed to change the values 

Reviewer: Nitpicking, I think you need to decide
 either: "Setting a one-size-fits-all does not play well with the reality of the diversity of clusters."
 or: "A single configuration that fits well for all scenarios is not possible"

> in order to respond to changes in their clusters’ needs, such as by resizing control plane nodes to provide more resources.

Reviewer: "clusters administrators must be allowed to change the values in order to respond to changes in their clusters’ needs, such as by resizing control plane nodes to provide more resources."
It is unclear to me (the reader) whether this is related to the operator or the operands.
As you know for the operator this can be done at the subscription level (mentioned later) and as far as I know there is nothing required from the operator author for that.
For the operands that's where work by the operator author is required, depending on the type of operand the authors should make it possible to configure the resources either through the custom resource created by the user (example Tekton) or through a ComponentConfig (example Prometheus)

Reviewer: "such as by resizing control plane nodes to provide more resources" I think that this should be removed. The operator authors have no influence on that

Author: > "clusters administrators must be allowed to change the values in order to respond to changes in their clusters’ needs, such as by resizing control plane nodes to provide more resources."
It is unclear to me (the reader) whether this is related to the operator or the operands.

That is for any POD, so in this for both Operator and Operands. 

> As you know for the operator this can be done at the subscription level (mentioned later) and as far as I know there is nothing required from the operator author for that.

Any operator consumer can change the manager manifests, in OLM it is recommended via subscription to keep the change persistent.  However, note that the Operator does not mandatorily integrate the project with OLM. This doc is in general. 
For any other pod created/managed by the Operator it can be achieved by letting the consumer change the values via crd/cr specs or env vars. then, depends on how the solution will be designed. 

> For the operands that's where work by the operator author is required, depending on the type of operand the authors should make it possible to configure the resources either through the custom resource created by the user (example Tekton) or through a ComponentConfig (example Prometheus)

> ComponentConfig to controller-runtime to allow controller authors to make go types backed by apimachinery to unmarshal and configure the ctrl.Manager{}
from: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/controller-runtime/blob/master/designs/component-config.md

ComponentConfig is designed to config the Operator/manager and not Operands at all. 
it does **not** support changing the resources, and its idea is to configure the [manager options](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/kubernetes/cmd/kube-controller-manager/app/options). 
We do have no resources in the manager options. 
I could not find the component config usage in: https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator
  
> "such as by resizing control plane nodes to provide more resources" I think that this should be removed. The operator authors have no influence on that

The goal here is clarified to the operator authors that cluster administrators must be allowed to resizing control plane nodes to provide more resources.
operator authors are able to develop solutions that allow or not it.

Author: We changed here as well. So, closing as sorted out and let's see the second round :-)

> **Following are some general recommendations to manage the resources:**

Reviewer: I think that make things clearer:
- either to make two parts: one for operator, one for operands
- or to specify each time whether the point is for operator, operands or both

Author: tried to address this one.

- **MUST** declare resource requests for both CPU and memory.

> - **OPTIONALLY** setting the resources limit for Memory and CPU (Note that if your project is integrated with OLM then, admins would be able to customize it via the [subscription][olm-subscriptions]). Also, be aware that our project was built with Kubebuilder or SDK scaffold then for the `Operator/manager`(See `config/manager/manager.yaml`), then some values which allow you to get started are scaffolded by default, however, you ought to optimize based on the needs.

Reviewer: Subscription is for operator configuration. It would be worth mentioning it and how it is done for operand even if it is trivial (Ok seeing that it is mentioned later in the doc: see my comment above regarding clearer separation of what is for operators and what is for operands)
Nitpicking: "be aware that our project was built with Kubebuilder or SDK scaffold...", proposing "be aware that if the project was generated by Kubebuilder or SDK scaffold then some values for the  `Operator/manager`(See `config/manager/manager.yaml`) are populated by default to get you started. However, you need to amend them based on your own tests and the specific needs of your operator"

Author: Tried to persuade this one.

> - **Should** provide the mechanisms for [Monitoring compute & memory resource usage][k8s-metrics]. Kubebuilder and SDK provide some [metrics][kb-metrics] which can help you with. Note that cluster admins can use it to monitor and resize the Operator and its Operands.

Reviewer: There is a caveat here. If the operator is installed by OLM and the bundle has a PodMonitor or a ServiceMonitor the complete InstallPlan will fail on a cluster, which does not have these CRD/the Prometheus operator installed. I am working on an [enhancement proposal](https://github.com/operator-framework/enhancements/pull/95) to avoid this situation as it is a significant drawback for operators provided by ISV

Reviewer: This should be called out

Author: To solve the specific problem, "Operator is not installed because depends on/is using another Operator" that seems that the correct approach would be: 
a) Use [Operator Lifecycle Manager dependency resolution](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.6/operators/understanding/olm/olm-understanding-dependency-resolution.html)

Then, IMO operator-sdk helps integrate the projects with OLM and provide its helper. Also, we provide the metrics feature here. So, the best approach is we ensure that (as we do for other cases) that operator-SDK will scaffold what is required to allow the metrics feature to work on the cluster. 

is that makes sense? 
@jmrodri @fabiand @estroz  wdyt?

Author: it is out of the scope, so I tracked : https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-sdk/issues/5381

> - **OPTIONALLY** ensuring that the Operators uses [liveness health check][k8s-probes] which can be used to check the `CPU` performance. If your project was built with Kubebuilder or SDK scaffold then, it is scaffolded by default for the `Operator/manager`. (See `config/manager/manager.yaml`).

Reviewer: "CPU performance" is probably not the right wording. Assuming "CPU usage" I don't think that a liveness probe is a good mechanism for that. The primary use case of a liveness probe is to catch a deadlock: an unrecoverable state. It then restarts the pod with a "virgin" state, which may allow to "work around" a bug.
Two things:
- If the liveness probe is too aggressive it may cause the pod to get restarted when it is just slow to respond due  to its load. This is counterproductive and at the opposite effect of what is desirable
- With controllers most the state should be stored in custom resources, which means that in some cases (possibly not all) restarting the pod won't help with the deadlock
- 
Long story short I would recommend "considering" rather than "ensuring" the use of health checks

Author: Reworded to `which can be used to check the performance to know more about the CPU usage. ` and used the considering

Author: I think we can remove the probe from here.

> - **Should** allow admins to customize the `requests/limits` amounts defined for the Pod/Deployment Operands created by the Operator and not keep them fixed on the code.

Reviewer: Two things:
- For the operands it may be admins (Prometheus) but also users (Tekton) that should be able to customize the  `requests/limits`
- Also, whenever possible (for instance Prometheus, probably not Tekton) best would be for the operator to automatically adjust the values to the environment rather than asking the user/admin to amend them

Author: Tekton is to test. Tests ought to be executed always in the same way, the same quantity of resources and etc. So, for the tests, these values ought to be fixed. So:
- If someone wants to create a test with Tekton then is able to change the values before the test as, please. 
- If you are worried here about our tests then, not that they will deploy the Operator and do basic tests only which means that any default value specified here should work because if not then, it never could make production.

Author: Addressed

> - **Should** document how cluster admins can customize/rightsize the resources limits for the Operator and Operands.

Reviewer: "admins" -> "users or administrators"
"the resources limits" -> "the resources requests and limits"

> You also might consider providing solutions that allow vertical pod autoscaler to manage arbitrary scaling for your Operators. [More info][k8s-vertical-pod-scaling]. 

Reviewer: Nitpicking: You might also consider leveraging the Vertical Pod Autoscaler to have the resources requested by the operator automatically adjusted to the cluster where it is deployed. 
Caveat: the same thing applies here as for PodMonitor and ServiceMonitor. If the VPA CRD is not available in the cluster where the operator gets deployed the InstallPlan will fail

> And then, you also might look for allowing [horizontal pod autoscaling][k8s-autoscaling] for the Operands. In this case, see that resource requests are also needed for horizontal pod autoscaling to work.

Reviewer: Nitpicking: you might also look at allowing... In this case, be aware that resource requests are also required for horizontal pod autoscaling to work

> **NOTE:** If you are using the k8s OpenShift vendor you might want to check the doc [Automatically adjust pod resource levels with the vertical pod autoscaler

Reviewer: Nitpicking: "If you are using OpenShift as Kubernetes distribution" instead of "the k8s OpenShift vendor"
This also covers OKD

Author: done

][ocp-pod-scaling].

### But, what happens

> #### when the resource requests are not set?

Author: IMHO that is implicit that is for the Pods and does not matter.
So, I'd prefer we avoid here to be too prolix

> #### when the resource requests are not set?

Author: Closing as sorted out since its title was changed at all. 
Feel free to ping and let me know if you think that we must address more changes here.

**If not set:** 
- configurations made by the cluster administrators such as [ResourceQuota][k8s-resources-quotas] might not work. 
- the Operators consumers might face resource shortage on a node when resource usage later increases, for example, during a daily peak in request rate.
- the Operators consumers might install the Operator in a node/namespace which does not have the minimal resources available.

#### when the resource limits are not set?

**If not set:** wrong configurations or code implementations can consume all resources available, affecting other components on cluster. 

> Also, it might let the containers more vulnerable such as to Dos Attacks. [More info][docker-security].

Author: @fgiloux, 
> If no CPU limit is set. Nothing bad will neither happen to the node where the pod is running nor the cluster
That is **NOT** true. Please, check the Kubernetes docs. I added here: https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-sdk/pull/5353#discussion_r753102148

Also, see:

- If you do not specify a CPU limit: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/assign-cpu-resource/#if-you-do-not-specify-a-cpu-limit
- Motivation for CPU requests and limits: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/assign-cpu-resource/#motivation-for-cpu-requests-and-limits

Regards ALL other points please see that they are already addressed in this document. Read `#### when the resource limits exceed?`

> Also, it might let the containers more vulnerable such as to Dos Attacks. [More info][docker-security].

Reviewer: Sorry but I respectfully disagree. 
From the link you shared: "The Container has no upper bound on the CPU resources it can use. The Container could use all of the CPU resources available on the Node where it is running."
This is not that terrible thing that you may think because:
- It won't be able to do that if there is CPU resource contention on the node
- After every process has received what it requested, free cycles are allocated by the  Completely Fair Scheduler according to the request set (not the limit). 
"
    The Pod can have bursts of activity where it makes use of CPU resources that happen to be available.
    The amount of CPU resources a Pod can use during a burst is limited to some reasonable amount.
"
Except for edge cases like performance testing or pods that request a very big amount of CPU compared to other workload I don't see a benefit of limiting the CPU that can be used (not considering bills of cloud providers or other things that should be detected by a monitoring system)

> Also, it might let the containers more vulnerable such as to Dos Attacks. [More info][docker-security].

Reviewer 2: Yep

> Also, it might let the containers more vulnerable such as to Dos Attacks. [More info][docker-security].

Author: We chat and I think we could come up with a text that sorted it out.

However, note that in this case, as described above, Cluster Admins has popular practices to ensure that all `Pods/Deployments` 

> in a node/namespace have the resources limited such as to use the [ResourceQuota][k8s-resources-quotas] 

Author: However, note that in this case, as described above, Cluster Admins has popular practices to ensure that all `Pods/Deployments` 
in a node/namespace -. That means **many** configurations which can be applied on the node and/or namespace. 

> such as == example

then, 
> to use the [ResourceQuota][k8s-resources-quotas] 
to configure the total amount of resources that can be consumed which if used in conjunction with namespaces, 
can prevent hitting the usage in one namespace affecting what is deployed on the others.

It is a copy and past from Kubernetes docs, see: 

> The resource quota feature can be configured to limit the total amount of resources that can be consumed. If used in conjunction with namespaces, it can prevent one team from hogging all the resources.
From: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/manage-resources-containers/

> in a node/namespace have the resources limited such as to use the [ResourceQuota][k8s-resources-quotas] 

Author: I tried to improve the text but that seems sorted out.
Please, feel free to ping me if not.

to configure the total amount of resources that can be consumed that if used in conjunction with namespaces, 

> which can prevent hitting the usage of all cluster resources and affect what is deployed on the other namespaces.

Author: accepted

#### when the resource limits exceed?

> - `For Memory`: K8s might kill the `Pod` with the reason `OOM Killed` and when/if possible will restart it.

Author: changed by coping and past from k8s docs.

- `For CPU`: the `Pod` is **not** killed for excessive CPU usage. The `CPU` is considered a "compressible" resource, 
and if the `Pod` starts hitting the CPU limits, Kubernetes starts throttling the container. That means the CPU will be artificially restricted, 
giving a potentially worse performance only. 

> 

Author: Kubernetes -> uses cgroups -> so, I do not think we ought to complicate the things here. I just rephase `Kubernetes uses kernel throttling` ( which is how you find that in the first google result )
it has not the goal to explain how k8s internally does that.

You might want to check the section [Troubleshooting][k8s-troubleshooting] in the Kubernetes documents to have a better 
idea how to debug these scenarios.

### Traffic sharding

The goal is to split or isolated ingress traffic from e.g. production and development, ending up on
different routers. This is a popular configuration option for dense multi-tenant clusters, where several

> [IngressController][k8s-ingress-controllers] deployed. 

Author: router -> here is not the API route. that is the IT term. 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Router_(computing)

So, I think I would prefer to keep it as it is if you do not mind but I added environments

> [IngressController][k8s-ingress-controllers] deployed. 

Author: addressed i think as well so closing.

In order for the `Ingress` resource to work, the cluster must have an ingress controller running. 
When you create an ingress, you should annotate each ingress with the appropriate to indicate 
which ingress controller should be used. If you do not define, your cloud provider may use a default 
ingress controller. Note that various ingress controllers operate slightly differently.

> 

Author: We need to clarify that depends on the Ingress Controller used.
Above we explain how we can do that with OCP API which is not == nginx for example.

> 

Author: We are not looking to describe how to use an ingress controller. 
The goal is to explain that needs to be customized and then, the customization depends on in the impl of [IngressController][k8s-ingress-controllers] adopted.

> 

Author: accepted

If your Operator creates resources and manages the routers then, the recommendation here is to allow 
your Operator users customize the required attributes to directing traffic as please them. For example, by providing 
the required specifications options via the CRD/CRs to allow the annotations to be customized and the 
Operator users configure the resources which should be used by each [IngressController][k8s-ingress-controllers].

> 

Author: sorted out.

Cluster administrators will naturally want to provide enough resource requests to their Operators in order to give them 
sufficient memory resources for safe operations, and avoid that other workloads impact them negatively.
For this reason, if you are integrating with [OLM][olm], you should, **always ship your operator `Deployment` 
with resource requests amounts for CPU and memory**.

The [ResourceQuota][k8s-resources-quotas] configuration also is applied to tenant workloads that are managed by your operator. Cluster administrators will typically set
a [ResourceQuota][k8s-resources-quotas] for each tenant's namespace as part of the onboarding. If your operator creates `Pods/Deployments` inside
the tenant namespace which do not specify at least resource requests for `CPU` and `Memory`, those `Pods/Deployments` may fail to schedule and tenants
may not be able to use your operator. Therefore, your operator is scheduled, it should **always apply at least resource requests for CPU and
memory** for `Pods/Deployments` that it creates as part of the reconciliation logic. Ideally your operator also applies 
memory limits to those `Pods/Deployments`. You may also consider CPU limits.

> 

Reviewer: I see that LimitRange is mentioned below. I am not sure whether it would be beneficial to give a hint on it here.

> 

Author: Not sure if I can follow up on your comment? 
What would be your suggestion here?

> 

Reviewer: I had something like that in mind:
"If your operator creates `Pods/Deployments` inside the tenant namespace..."  => "If a LimitRange  with default values has not been created in each namespace and  your operator creates `Pods/Deployments` inside the tenant namespace..."
I was not sure it is needed because we have later in the page:
"configurations made by the cluster administrators such as [ResourceQuota][k8s-resources-quotas] might not work without LimitRanges. The LimitRanger admission controller can provide default values for resource requests and limits when they have not been defined."

> 

Author: anyway, I updated the text as sugested. Tks.

are populated by default to get you started, however, you ought to optimize them based on your own tests and the specific needs of your operator.
- **SHOULD** provide the mechanisms for [Monitoring compute & memory resource usage][k8s-metrics]. Kubebuilder and SDK provide some [metrics][kb-metrics] 
which can help you with. Note that cluster admins can use it to monitor and resize the Operator and its Operands.
**NOTE**  If the Operator is integrated with OLM and the bundle has a `PodMonitor` or a `ServiceMonitor` the 
complete `InstallPlan` will fail on a cluster, which does not have these CRD/the Prometheus operator installed. 
In this case, you might want to ensure the dependency requirement with [OLM dependency][olm-dep] or make clear 
its requirement for the Operator consumers. 
- **SHOULD** allow admins to customize the `requests/limits` amounts defined for the `Pod/Deployment`
created by the Operator and not keep them fixed on the code.
- **SHOULD** document how your Operator consumer can customize/rightsize the resources requests and limits for the 
Operator and Operands `Pod/Deployments` or let its consumers know that the solution could adopt a better approach where 

> the Operator automatically adjust the values to the environment rather than asking its consumers to amend them

Reviewer: Nitpicking: "adjusts"

You might also consider leveraging the [Vertical Pod Autoscaler][k8s-vertical-pod-scaling] to have the resources requested by the Operator 
automatically adjusted to the cluster where it is deployed. You might also 

> look at allowing [horizontal pod autoscaling][k8s-autoscaling] for the other `Pod/Deployments` created by your project. 

Reviewer: I would keep talking about "Operator" rather than "project"

In this case, be aware that resource requests are also required for horizontal pod autoscaling to work.

**NOTE:** If you are using OpenShift as Kubernetes distribution you might want to check the 
doc [Automatically adjust pod resource levels with the vertical pod autoscaler
][ocp-pod-scaling]. Caveat: If the VPA CRD is not available in the cluster where the operator 
gets deployed the InstallPlan will fail. Please, see how to work with [OLM dependency][olm-dep] 

> if your project integrating with.

Reviewer: Nitpicking: "if your project is integrating with it"

### But, what happens

#### when the resource requests are not set?

**If not set:** 
- configurations made by the cluster administrators such as [ResourceQuota][k8s-resources-quotas] might not work with the usage of the LimitRanger admission controller to force defaults might not work.
- the Operators consumers might face resource shortages on a node when resource usage increases, for example, during a daily peak in request rate.

> - the Operators consumers might will be unable to install the Operator because does not have the minimal resources available.

Reviewer: It is not fully clear to me. If resources are not requested by the operator deployment and it is scheduled on a node, which is already heavily utilized it may get starved or resources and as such times out (CPU) or fails (memory)  by startup. Would it cause an installation failure? I would tend to think that the installation is successful but the operator is not usable.

As I am not sure to follow your intent there is also another scenario:
if the operator DOES have resources requested and the cluster does not have capacity to accommodate it the pod won't be scheduled and stay in a pending state

Author: Change for `- the Operators consumers might be unable to successfully deploy the Operator because it does not have the minimal resources available.` we ought to not describe the details here in order to reduce the complexities

the total amount of resources that can be requested or allowed in a single namespace. 
This may protect against over consumption of resources by operands of a faulty or wrongly configured operator. 
On the other hand it also means that the operator may not be able to create additional pods, 
hence provides its functionalities when the limit has been reached.

#### when the resource limits have been reached?

- `For Memory`: the container might be terminated with the reason `OOM Killed`. If it is restartable, the kubelet will 
restart it, as with any other type of runtime failure.
- `For CPU`: the container might or might not be allowed to exceed its CPU limit for extended periods of time. 
However, it will not be killed for excessive CPU usage. The `CPU` is considered a "compressible" resource, 
and if the `Pod` starts hitting the CPU limits, Kubernetes uses kernel to starts throttling the container. 
That means the CPU will be artificially restricted, giving a potentially worse performance only. 

You might want to check the [Troubleshooting][k8s-troubleshooting] section in the Kubernetes documents to have a better 
idea how to debug these scenarios.

### Traffic sharding

> The goal is to split or isolated ingress traffic from e.g. production and development environments, ending up on

Reviewer: Nitpicking: "to split or to isolate"

memory** for `Pods/Deployments` that it creates as part of the reconciliation logic. Ideally your operator also applies 
memory limits to those `Pods/Deployments`. You may also consider CPU limits.

#### General guidelines

**Note that pretty much all controllers consume:**
- `CPU`: largely based on the number of reconciliations they perform, which are generally related to event activity for resources they're watching.
- `Memory`: largely based on the number of primary resources that exist (multiplied by some factor based on the number of operand resources they need to watch as a result) via informer caches.

Operator authors cannot anticipate how they scale in usage in all customer environments. So, a single configuration that 
fits well for all scenarios is not possible then, clusters administrators must be allowed to change the values 
in order to respond to changes in their clusters needs, such as by resizing control plane nodes to provide more resources.

**Following are some general recommendations to manage the resources:**

> - **MUST** declare resource requests for both CPU and memory for the `Operator/manager`  and any `Pod/Deployment` managed by it

Author: ```suggestion
- **MUST** declare resource requests for both, CPU and Memory, for the `Operator/manager`  and any `Pod/Deployment` managed by it
```

> - **OPTIONALLY** setting the resources limit for Memory and CPU for the Operator Pod and any `Pod/Deployment` managed by it.

Author: ```suggestion
- **OPTIONALLY** setting the resources limit for CPU and Memory for the Operator Pod and any `Pod/Deployment` managed by it.
```

**NOTE** If your project is integrated with OLM then, admins would be able to customize it for the `Operator/manager` 
via the [subscription][olm-subscriptions]). Also, be aware that if the project was generated by Kubebuilder or SDK scaffold 
then some values for the `Operator/manager`(See `config/manager/manager.yaml`) 

> are populated by default to get you started, however, you ought to optimize them based on your own tests and the specific needs of your operator.

Author: That seems the same : https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-sdk/pull/5353#discussion_r753660008

Also, since you say that you are ok with I am closing it as sorted out. : -)

- **Should** provide the mechanisms for [Monitoring compute & memory resource usage][k8s-metrics]. Kubebuilder and SDK provide some [metrics][kb-metrics] 
which can help you with. Note that cluster admins can use it to monitor and resize the Operator and its Operands.
**NOTE**  If the Operator is integrated with OLM and the bundle has a `PodMonitor` or a `ServiceMonitor` the 
complete `InstallPlan` will fail on a cluster, which does not have these CRD/the Prometheus operator installed. 
In this case, you might want to ensure the dependency requirement with [OLM dependency][olm-dep] or make clear 

> its requirement for the Operator consumers. 

Author: We have not and I do not think that we would have only one section in SDK and another in OLM explaining:
a) That SDK does the default and where
b) How to manage the resources via subscription: That would be nice to have, such as, how to work with subscriptions to change the default config. However, anyway, we would need to have a note here saying the admins can change the default resource values via subscription and linking that.

> its requirement for the Operator consumers. 

Author: @jmrodri I am closing this one since in another comment you said that anyway it would be fine for you at least for now.

- **Should** allow admins to customize the `requests/limits` amounts defined for the `Pod/Deployment`
created by the Operator and not keep them fixed on the code.
- **Should** document how your Operator consumer can customize/rightsize the resources requests and limits for the 
Operator and Operands `Pod/Deployments` or let its consumers know that the solution could adopt a better approach where 
the Operator automatically adjust the values to the environment rather than asking its consumers to amend them

> You might also consider leveraging the Vertical Pod Autoscaler to have the resources requested by the Operator 

Author: ```suggestion
You might also consider leveraging the [Vertical Pod Autoscaler][k8s-vertical-pod-scaling] to have the resources requested by the Operator 
```

> You might also consider leveraging the Vertical Pod Autoscaler to have the resources requested by the Operator 

Author: That has a link for its docs as well. Thank you

> automatically adjusted to the cluster where it is deployed.[More info][k8s-vertical-pod-scaling]. You might also 

Author: ```suggestion
automatically adjusted to the cluster where it is deployed. You might also 
```

look at allowing [horizontal pod autoscaling][k8s-autoscaling] for the other `Pod/Deployments` created by your project. 
In this case, be aware that resource requests are also required for horizontal pod autoscaling to work.

**NOTE:** If you are using OpenShift as Kubernetes distribution you might want to check the 
doc [Automatically adjust pod resource levels with the vertical pod autoscaler
][ocp-pod-scaling]. Caveat: If the VPA CRD is not available in the cluster where the operator 
gets deployed the InstallPlan will fail. PLease, see how to work with [OLM dependency][olm-dep] 
if your project integrating with.

### But, what happens

#### when the resource requests are not set?

**If not set:** 

> - configurations made by the cluster administrators such as [ResourceQuota][k8s-resources-quotas] might not work with the usage of the LimitRanger admission controller to force defaults might not work.

Reviewer 3: This sentence is confusing. So what exactly "might not work"? The ResourceQuota? or the LimitRanger? how does one affect the other?

Reviewer: Proposal: configurations made by the cluster administrators such as [ResourceQuota][k8s-resources-quotas] might not work without LimitRanges. The LimitRanger admission controller can provide default values for resource requests and limits when they have not been defined.

Author: I liked the  fgiloux's suggestion.  Done.

> - the Operators consumers might face resource shortage on a node when resource usage later increases, for example, during a daily peak in request rate.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- the Operators consumers might face resource shortages on a node when resource usage increases, for example, during a daily peak in request rate.
```

- the Operators consumers might will be unable to install the Operator because does not have the minimal resources available.
- the scheduler cannot make an informed placement choice when it picks the nodes the operator pods will be running on
- when there is memory contention on the node the pod is likely to get either evicted or OOM killed
- when there is CPU contention on the node the pod is likely to get starved of CPU cycles making the operator unresponsive

> #### when the resource limits are not set?

Reviewer 3: Again, this is awkward as a heading. Consider the following:

```suggestion
#### Resource Limits

What happens when the resource limits are not set?
```
Then go into your **If not set:** stuff below.

**If not set:** wrong configurations or code implementations can consume all resources available, affecting other components on cluster. 
Also, it might let the containers more vulnerable such as to Dos Attacks. [More info][docker-security]. See that when there is memory 
contention on a node, pods will start getting evicted and possibly killed according to their OOM score. The node will be flagged with a 
MemoryPressure condition and eventually made unschedulable. However, when there is CPU contention on the node, neighbour pods may 
get slowed down to the CPU cores they requested.

However, a popular practice by cluster administrators is to leverage [ResourceQuota][k8s-resources-quotas] to limit 
the total amount of resources that can be requested or allowed in a single namespace. 
This may protect against over consumption of resources by operands of a faulty or wrongly configured operator. 
On the other hand it also means that the operator may not be able to create additional pods, 
hence provides its functionalities when the limit has been reached.

> #### when the resource limits have been reached?

Reviewer 3: Awkward heading. Consider the following:

```suggestion
#### Limits reached

What happens when the resource limits have been reached? The following things will happen:
```

- `For Memory`: the container might be terminated with the reason `OOM Killed`. If it is restartable, the kubelet will 
restart it, as with any other type of runtime failure.
- `For CPU`: the container might or might not be allowed to exceed its CPU limit for extended periods of time. 
However, it will not be killed for excessive CPU usage. The `CPU` is considered a "compressible" resource, 
and if the `Pod` starts hitting the CPU limits, Kubernetes uses kernel to starts throttling the container. 
That means the CPU will be artificially restricted, giving a potentially worse performance only. 

> You might want to check the section [Troubleshooting][k8s-troubleshooting] in the Kubernetes documents to have a better 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You might want to check the [Troubleshooting][k8s-troubleshooting] section in the Kubernetes documents to have a better 
```

sufficient memory resources and CPU cycles for safe operations, and avoid that other workloads impact them negatively.
For this reason, if you are integrating with [OLM][olm], you should, **always ship your operator `Deployment` 
with resource requests amounts for CPU and memory**.

The [ResourceQuota][k8s-resources-quotas] configuration also is applied to tenant workloads that are managed by your operator. Cluster administrators will typically set
a [ResourceQuota][k8s-resources-quotas] for each tenant's namespace as part of the onboarding.  If a `LimitRange` with default values has not been created in each namespace and your operator creates `Pods/Deployments` inside the tenant namespace which do not specify at least resource requests for `CPU` and `Memory`, those `Pods/Deployments` may fail to schedule and tenants
may not be able to use your operator. Therefore, your operator is scheduled, it should **always apply at least resource requests for CPU and
memory** for `Pods/Deployments` that it creates as part of the reconciliation logic. Ideally your operator also applies 

> memory limits to those `Pods/Deployments`. You may also consider CPU limits.

Author: done.

> #### General guidelines

Author: +1

then some values for the `Operator/manager`(See `config/manager/manager.yaml`) 
are populated by default to get you started, however, you ought to optimize them based on your own tests and the specific needs of your operator.
- **SHOULD** provide the mechanisms for [Monitoring compute & memory resource usage][k8s-metrics]. Kubebuilder and SDK provide some [metrics][kb-metrics] 
which can help you with. Note that cluster admins can use it to monitor and resize the Operator and its Operands.
**NOTE**  If the Operator is integrated with OLM and the bundle has a `PodMonitor` or a `ServiceMonitor` the 
complete `InstallPlan` will fail on a cluster, which does not have these CRD/the Prometheus operator installed. 
In this case, you might want to ensure the dependency requirement with [OLM dependency][olm-dep] or make clear 
its requirement for the Operator consumers. 
- **SHOULD** allow admins to customize the `requests/limits` amounts defined for the `Pod/Deployment`
created by the Operator and not keep them fixed on the code.
- **SHOULD** document how your Operator consumer can customize/rightsize the resources requests and limits for the 

> Operator and Operands `Pod/Deployments` or let its consumers know that the solution could adjust a better approach where 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Operator and Operands `Pod/Deployments` or describe how the solution could be configured to automatically adjust these values based on the environment.
```

the Operator automatically adjust the values to the environment rather than asking its consumers to amend them

You might also consider leveraging the [Vertical Pod Autoscaler][k8s-vertical-pod-scaling] to have the resources requested by the Operator 
automatically adjusted to the cluster where it is deployed. You might also 
look at allowing [horizontal pod autoscaling][k8s-autoscaling] for the other `Pod/Deployments` created by your Operator. 
In this case, be aware that resource requests are also required for horizontal pod autoscaling to work.

> **NOTE:** If you are using OpenShift as Kubernetes distribution you might want to check the 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**NOTE:** If you are using OpenShift as your Kubernetes distribution you might want to check the 
```

doc [Automatically adjust pod resource levels with the vertical pod autoscaler
][ocp-pod-scaling]. Caveat: If the VPA CRD is not available in the cluster where the operator 
gets deployed the InstallPlan will fail. Please, see how to work with [OLM dependency][olm-dep] 
if your project integrating with it.

### Why should you set these?

#### Resource Requests

What happens when the resource requests are not set?

- configurations made by the cluster administrators such as [ResourceQuota][k8s-resources-quotas] might not work without LimitRanges. The LimitRanger admission controller can provide default values for resource requests and limits when they have not been defined.
- the Operators consumers might face resource shortages on a node when resource usage increases, for example, during a daily peak in request rate.

> - the Operators consumers might be unable to successfully deploy the Operator because it does not have the minimal resources available.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- the Operator's consumers might be unable to successfully deploy the Operator because it does not have the minimal resources available.
```

Reviewer 4: Operators is capitalized here but not in other places, please be consistent.

- the scheduler cannot make an informed placement choice when it picks the nodes the operator pods will be running on
- when there is memory contention on the node the pod is likely to get either evicted or OOM killed

> - when there is CPU contention on the node the pod is likely to get starved of CPU cycles making the operator unresponsive

Author: done

#### Resource Limits

What happens when the resource limits are not set?

Wrong configurations or code implementations can consume all resources available, affecting other components on cluster. 

> Also, it might let the containers more vulnerable such as to Dos Attacks. [More info][docker-security]. See that when there is memory 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Also, it might leave the containers more vulnerable such as to Dos Attacks. [More info][docker-security]. See that when there is memory 
```

  # More info: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/manage-resources-containers/
  resources:
    requests:
      cpu: 10m
      memory: 64Mi
    ... 
```

In order to prevent tenants from consuming all the resources on a cluster or blocking other workloads 
from being scheduled, many production clusters will define [ResourceQuota][k8s-resources-quotas] configuration.
[ResourceQuota][k8s-resources-quotas] configuration in a namespace will cause all pods without 
[Requests or limits][k8s-requests-limits] for `CPU` and `Memory` to be rejected.

Cluster administrators will naturally want to provide enough resource requests to their Operators in order to give them 
sufficient memory resources and CPU cycles for safe operations, and avoid that other workloads impact them negatively.
For this reason, if you are integrating with [OLM][olm], you should, **always ship your operator `Deployment` 
with resource requests amounts for CPU and memory**.

The [ResourceQuota][k8s-resources-quotas] configuration also is applied to tenant workloads that are managed by your operator. Cluster administrators will typically set

> a [ResourceQuota][k8s-resources-quotas] for each tenant's namespace as part of the onboarding. If your operator creates `Pods/Deployments` inside
> the tenant namespace which do not specify at least resource requests for `CPU` and `Memory`, those `Pods/Deployments` may fail to schedule and tenants

Author: ```suggestion
a [ResourceQuota][k8s-resources-quotas] for each tenant's namespace as part of the onboarding.  If a `LimitRange` with default values has not been created in each namespace and your operator creates `Pods/Deployments` inside the tenant namespace which do not specify at least resource requests for `CPU` and `Memory`, those `Pods/Deployments` may fail to schedule and tenants
```

---
title: "Multi-Tenancy Best Practices"
linkTitle: "Multi-Tenancy"
weight: 4
description: This guide describes the best practices concepts to write Operators for Multi-Tenancy solutions.
---

## Operator Behavioral Guidelines

### Managing Resources

#### Resource Requests

> In Multi-tenant clusters, administrators must consider the effects that one tenant's workloads may have on others. 

Reviewer 5: this is not just a multitenant problem.  The operator can also compete with its own operands, with other workloads from the same user(if that is considered the same tenant), and with the control plane/core components.

Author: I agree 100+
So, since this doc is about multi-tenancy, wdyt about we address it in another doc/topic in the best section practices? suggestion?

include reasonable memory and CPU resource requests for safe operations and avoid negatively impacting other workloads. 
When integrating with [OLM][olm], resource requests can be defined by modifying the`config/manager/manager.yaml` file to 
ensure that your CSV will be build with them when you run `make bundle` as shown below:

```yml
  ...
  # TODO(user): Configure the resources accordingly based on the project requirements.
  # More info: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/manage-resources-containers/
  resources:
    requests:
      cpu: 10m
      memory: 64Mi
    ...
```

The [ResourceQuota][k8s-resources-quotas] configuration also applies to tenant workloads that are managed by 
your Operator. Cluster administrators will typically set a [ResourceQuota][k8s-resources-quotas] for each 
tenant's namespace as part of the onboarding. If a LimitRange with default values has not been created 
in each namespace and your operator creates Pods/Deployments inside the tenant namespace which do not 
specify at least resource requests for CPU and Memory, those Pods/Deployments may fail to 

> schedule and tenants may not be able to use your Operator. 

Reviewer 5: why would they fail to schedule?

> Therefore, your operator is scheduled, it should **always** apply at least resource requests for `CPU` and

Reviewer 5: do you mean "therefore to ensure your operator is scheduled"?

still not sure why it wouldn't be scheduled.  The only case i can think of is that the workload could be rejected if there's no default limitrange *and* quota enforcement is turned on, and your workload doesn't specify resource requests.  i'm not sure what the behavior is in that case.

Author: The following are the criteria that motivate Daniels to create the original guidance:

- If a LimitRange is activated in a namespace for computing resources like CPU and memory, users must specify requests or limits for those values. Otherwise, the system may reject Pod creation. (https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/limit-range/#overview-of-limit-range)
- If quota is enabled in a namespace for compute resources like cpu and memory, users must specify requests or limits for those values; otherwise, the quota system may reject pod creation. Hint: Use the LimitRanger admission controller to force defaults for pods that make no compute resource requirements. (https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/resource-quotas/)

I tried to change the original idea here. Please, let me know WDYT?

Author: Addressed

memory for `Pods/Deployments` that it creates as part of the reconciliation logic. Ideally your 
Operator also applies memory limits to those `Pods/Deployments`. You may also consider CPU limits.

#### General guidelines

Note that pretty much all controllers consume:

- `CPU`: largely based on the number of reconciliations they perform, which are generally related to event activity for resources they're watching.
- `Memory`: largely based on the number of primary resources that exist (multiplied by some factor based on the number of operand resources they need to watch as a result) via informer caches.

> Operator authors cannot anticipate how their operators will scale in all customer environments. A single configuration that fits all scenarios is not possible. Cluster administrators must be allowed to change the values in order to respond to their cluster's needs, such as resizing the control plane nodes to provide more resources.

Reviewer 5: why cite resizing control plane nodes here? The thing operators need to do is ensure that the admin can change the resource requests/limits of the operator, and of the operands.

[ocp-route]: https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.9/rest_api/network_apis/route-route-openshift-io-v1.html#route-route-openshift-io-v1
[ocp-ingress-doc]: https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.9/networking/ingress-operator.html#nw-ingress-sharding-route-labels_configuring-ingress
[ocp-blog]: https://rcarrata.com/openshift/ocp4_route_sharding/
[k8s-network-policy]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/network-policies/
[olm]: https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-lifecycle-manager
[k8s-metrics]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/manage-resources-containers/#monitoring-compute-memory-resource-usage
[k8s-autoscaling]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/horizontal-pod-autoscale/#support-for-resource-metrics
[k8s-vertical-pod-scaling]: https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/tree/master/vertical-pod-autoscaler
[ocp-pod-scaling]: https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.9/nodes/pods/nodes-pods-vertical-autoscaler.html
[kb-metrics]: https://book.kubebuilder.io/reference/metrics.html
[k8s-probes]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-liveness-readiness-startup-probes/

> [olm-subscriptions]: https://github.com/operator-framework/api/blob/v0.10.7/pkg/operators/v1alpha1/subscription_types.go#L63

Author: ```suggestion
[olm-subscriptions]: https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-lifecycle-manager/blob/master/doc/design/subscription-config.md#resources
```

[docker-security]: https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Docker_Security_Cheat_Sheet.html#rule-7-limit-resources-memory-cp[%E2%80%A6]le-descriptors-processes-restarts
[k8s-troubleshooting]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/manage-resources-containers/#troubleshooting

> [olm-dep]: https://olm.operatorframework.io/docs/concepts/olm-architecture/dependency-resolution/

Author: ```suggestion
[olm-dep]: https://olm.operatorframework.io/docs/concepts/olm-architecture/dependency-resolution/
[olm-subscription-config]: https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-lifecycle-manager/blob/master/doc/design/subscription-config.md#resources
```

---
title: "Multi-Tenancy Best Practices"
linkTitle: "Multi-Tenancy"
weight: 1
description: This guide describes the best practices concepts to write Operators for Multi-Tenancy solutions.
---

## Operator Behavioral Guidelines

### Create resource requests

* for your Operator's own `Pods`
* for `Pods` your operator creates / manages

The reasoning behind this is, to allow [ResourceQuota][k8s-resources-quotas] configuration
to work. This is something that every production cluster will follow as a best practice, to prevents tenants
from being able to consume all resources on the cluster and block other worklaods from being scheduled. 
[ResourceQuota][k8s-resources-quotas] in a for CPU and RAM to be rejected. For further information see:

> [Requests and limits][k8s-requests-limits]

Reviewer 3: this tells me why we should be creating resource requests, but it doesn't seem to tell me HOW.

Reviewer 3: > The reasoning behind this is, to allow [ResourceQuota][k8s-resources-quotas] configuration

The reasoning behind WHAT? I'm confused what "this" refers to?

> to work. This is something that every production cluster will follow as a best practice, to prevents tenants
> from being able to consume all resources on the cluster and block other worklaods from being scheduled. 

I tried to reword this a bit, it would be better stated as follows:

_In order to prevent tenants from consuming all the resources on a cluster or blocking other workloads from being scheduled, many production clusters will DO WHAT?_

But I don't know *what* the cluster will do to prevent that. It wasn't clear from your original paragraph what that is.

> [ResourceQuota][k8s-resources-quotas] in a for CPU and RAM to be rejected. For further information see:
> [Requests and limits][k8s-requests-limits]

ResourceQuote in a for CPU doesn't make sense. I'm not sure what you're trying to say here.

> **IMPORTANT:** Because OLM-managed Operators typically don't run on Cluster infra nodes, they are consuming paid CPU cores from a user
> perspective, so they naturally want to at least limit the maximum amount of resources such non-workload components can take up

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**IMPORTANT:** Because OLM-managed Operators do not run on Cluster infra nodes, they will consume paid CPU cores. Users will naturally want to limit the maximum amount of resources these non-workload components can take up.
```

> For this reason, if you are integrating your project with [OLM][olm] you should **always ship your operator `Deployment` with resource requests**.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For this reason, if you are integrating with [OLM][olm], you should  **always ship your operator `Deployment` with resource requests**.
```

> The concepts above also apply to tenant workloads which are managed by your operator. Cluster administrators will typically set

Reviewer 3: What concepts? It was not clear from what I read. I must be missing something .

a `ResourceQuota` for each tenant's namespace / project as part of the onboarding. If your operator creates `Pods` inside
tenant namespace which do not specify at least resource requests for CPU and RAM, those pods will fail to schedule and tenants
will not be able to use your operator. Therefore your operator should **always apply at least resource requests for CPU and
RAM** for `Pods` that it creates as part of reconcilication. Ideally your operator also applies limits to those `Pods`.
Resource requests are also needed for horizontal pod autoscaling to work
([docs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/horizontal-pod-autoscale/#support-for-resource-metrics)).

> ### If your operator creates `Ingress` objects

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### `Ingress` objects
```

> * allow users to supply custom labels to `Ingress` to allow for router sharding

Reviewer 3: Why is this a bullet? Feels like this could be a good introductory sentence.

Reviewer 3: _WHAT_ should allow users to supply custom labels? the operator?

> This is a popular configuration option for dense multi-tenant clusters, where several [IngressController][k8s-ingress-controllers] configuration have

Reviewer 3: _WHAT_ is a popular configuration option?

been deployed. The goal is to split ingress traffic from e.g. production and development, ending up on different routers. These
routers are `Pods` inside a `Deployment` that carry a specific label to receive traffic from certain ingress controllers. The
label is applied at the `Ingress` level and there is no pre-defined convention here, so users set these custom labels in
accordance to how they configured their `IngressController` instances.

**NOTE** If you are developing your Operator to be used in K8S vendor like OpenShift or OKD you might want to use helper APIs to work 
with `Ingress` such as, for example, [Route][ocp-route]. In this way, we would like to recommend check its [docs][ocp-ingress-doc]
and this [blog][ocp-blog] for an end-to-end example.

> **Your operator should allow the user to specify custom labels for any `Ingress` that it manages**.

Reviewer 3: This seems out of place and repetitive

> ### If your operator creates `NetworkPolicy` objects

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### `NetworkPolicy` Objects
```

> * apply fine-grained network policies to the extent that is required for your managed application to function properly
> * apply fine-grained network policies to enable your managed application internal components to communicate among each other
> * allow users to disable network policy management (your operator doesn't deploy [NetworkPolicy][k8s-network-policy] instances at all)
> * do not create "allow traffic from everywhere in the cluster" type policies

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If your operator creates `NetworkPolicy` objects 

* apply fine-grained network policies to the extent that is required for your managed application to function properly
* apply fine-grained network policies to enable your managed application internal components to communicate among each other
* allow users to disable network policy management (your operator doesn't deploy [NetworkPolicy][k8s-network-policy] instances at all)
* do not create "allow traffic from everywhere in the cluster" type policies
```

Again _WHAT_ should apply fine-grained network policies? The Operator?

Author: please let me know if that is better now.

Usage of [NetworkPolicy][k8s-network-policy] is popular in multi-tenant cluster to provide an extra layer 

> of segregation among tenants within SDN solutions. Users typically costumize this extensively with goal to disallow network traffic among unrelated

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
of segregation among tenants within SDN solutions. Users typically customize this extensively with goal to disallow network traffic among unrelated
```

tenants. Operators that deploy a `accept all traffic from anywhere in the cluster` style policy, are creating an obstacle in
pursuing this goal, especially if it cannot be disabled. In security-conscious environments policies like these are not allowed
in production. In such cases your operator should minimally **have the option to prevent [NetworkPolicy][k8s-network-policy] objects from being
created** and leave these to the user. In more advanced cases, your operator should create [NetworkPolicy][k8s-network-policy] configurations that

> follow the least-privilege principle as well implement deny-all-allow-some rules.

Reviewer 3: This feels like it should be the introduction into the this entire section.

---
title: "Multi-Tenancy Best Practices"
linkTitle: "Multi-Tenancy"
weight: 1
description: This guide describes the best practices concepts to write Operators for Multi-Tenancy solutions.
---

## Operator Behavioral Guidelines

### NetworkPolicy 

> If your Operator create or manage [NetworkPolicy][k8s-network-policy] configurations ensure that your solution:

Reviewer 3: The tense doesn't match.
```suggestion
If your Operator creates or manages [NetworkPolicy][k8s-network-policy] configurations ensure that your solution:
```

> * apply fine-grained network policies to the extent that is required for your managed application to function properly
> * apply fine-grained network policies to enable your managed application internal components to communicate among each other
> * allow users to disable network policy management (your operator doesn't deploy [NetworkPolicy][k8s-network-policy] instances at all)
> * do not create "allow traffic from everywhere in the cluster" type policies

Reviewer 3: And now to agree with the intro sentence the tense needs to agree IMO.

```suggestion
* applies fine-grained network policies to the extent that is required for your managed application to function properly
* applies fine-grained network policies to enable your managed application's internal components to communicate among each other
* allows users to disable network policy management (your operator doesn't deploy [NetworkPolicy][k8s-network-policy] instances at all)
* does not create "allow traffic from everywhere in the cluster" type policies
```

follow the least-privilege principle as well implement deny-all-allow-some rules.

### Resource Requests

Create resource requests for CPU and memory:

* for your Operator's manager `Deployment` (See `config/manager/manager.yaml`)
* for any `Pods` and `Deployments` which are creates by your Operator

```yml
  ...
  # TODO(user): Configure the resources accordingly based on the project requirements.
  # More info: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/manage-resources-containers/
  resources:
    requests:
      cpu: 10m
      memory: 64Mi
    ... 
```

In order to prevent tenants from consuming all the resources on a cluster or blocking other workloads 
from being scheduled, many production clusters will define [ResourceQuota][k8s-resources-quotas] configuration.
[ResourceQuota][k8s-resources-quotas] configuration in a namespace will cause all pods without 
[Requests and limits][k8s-requests-limits] for CPU and memory to be rejected.

Because OLM-managed Operators do not run on Cluster infra nodes, they will consume paid CPU cores. 
Users will naturally want to limit the maximum amount of resources these non-workload components can take up. 

> For this reason, if you are integrating with [OLM][olm], you should, **always ship your operator `Deployment` with resource requests ammounts for CPU and memory**.

Author: @awgreene @kevinrizza could you please give a look at this one.
